1 
 
Anatomy is the study of the structure of the body and the relationship of its 
constituent parts to each other. 
The cell is the basic unit of the human body. Most types of cells tend to occur 
in groups similar both in appearance and in function. Such organized groups 
of cells are known as tissues. 
Various types of tissues form more complex anatomical functional units 
known as organs which in turns form system. 
The three main approaches to studying anatomy are regional, systemic, and 
clinical (applied), 
☺Regional anatomy is the method of studying the body's structure by 
focusing attention on a specific part (e.g., the head), region (the face), or 
subregion (the orbit); examining the arrangement and relationships of the 
various systemic structures (muscles, nerves, arteries, etc.) within it. 
☺Systemic anatomy recognizes the organization of the body's organs into 
systems that work together to carry out complex functions. The basic systems 
are: 
The integumentary system consists of the skin and its appendages. 
The skeletal system (osteology) consists of bones and cartilage. 
The articular system (arthrology) consists of joints and their associated 
ligaments. 
The muscular system (myology) consists of muscles that act (contract) to 
move parts of the body.  
The nervous system (neurology) consists of the central nervous system 
(brain and spinal cord) and the peripheral nervous system (nerves and 
ganglia).  
The circulatory system (angiology) consists of the cardiovascular (the 
heart and blood vessels) and lymphatic systems, which function in parallel to 
transport the body's fluids. 
The digestive or alimentary system (gastroenterology) consists of the 
organs and glands associated with ingestion, mastication (chewing), 
deglutition (swallowing), digestion, and absorption of food and the elimination 
of feces (solid waste) remaining after the nutrients have been absorbed. 
The respiratory system consists of the air passages and lungs that supply 
oxygen to the blood for cellular respiration and eliminate carbon dioxide from 
it.  
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
2 
 
The urinary system (urology) consists of the kidneys, ureters, urinary 
bladder, and urethra, which filter blood and subsequently produce, transport, 
store, and intermittently excrete urine. 
The reproductive or genital system consists of the gonads (ovaries and 
testes) that produce eggs (oocytes and sperms), the ducts that transport 
them. 
The endocrine system (endocrinology) consists of discrete ductless glands 
(such as the thyroid gland). 
☺Clinical (applied) anatomy emphasizes application of anatomical 
knowledge to the practice of medicine. 
The anatomical position:  
The person is oriented in an erect standing position, with eyes and head 
looking forwards, the arms close to the sides, palms of the hands facing 
forward with fingers extended, and feet forward and perpendicular to the body 
with the heels are together.  
The anatomical planes 
The median sagittal plane is an imaginary vertical plane passing through 
the center of the body, dividing it into equal right and left halves (Fig. 1).  
Paramedian sagittal plane is any plane parallel to the median plane.  
Coronal plane is any vertical plane at right angle to the median plane or 
sagittal plane. It divides the body into anterior and posterior parts. 
Horizontal or transverse plane is any plane at right angle to both the 
median and coronal planes. It divides the body into upper and lower parts.  
Terms of position 
☺Median: any structure lying in the median plane. 
☺Anterior (ventral): any structure nearer to the front of the body. 
☺Posterior (dorsal): any structure nearer to the back of the body. 
☺Proximal: any structure nearer to the roots of the limbs (trunk). 
☺Distal: any structure far away from the roots of the limbs (trunk). 
☺Superficial: means nearer to the surface (skin) of the body. 
☺Deep: means away from the surface (skin) of the body. 
☺Superior means closer to the head. 
☺Inferior means closer to the feet. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
3 
 
☺Medial: A structure situated nearer to the median plane of the body than 
another is said to be medial to the other. 
☺Lateral: A structure that lies farther away from the median plane than 
another is said to be lateral to the other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Terms related to movement (Fig.2): 
☺Flexion is a movement that takes place in a sagittal plane. For example, 
flexion of the elbow joint approximates the anterior surface of the forearm to 
the anterior surface of the arm. It is usually an anterior movement, but it is 
occasionally posterior, as in the case of the knee joint. 
☺Extension means straightening the joint and usually takes place in a 
posterior direction.  
 
♦Lateral flexion is a movement of the trunk in the coronal plane. 
 
Fig. 1: The anatomical position 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
4 
 
☺Abduction of a limb is the movement away from the midline of the body in 
the coronal plane.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2: Some anatomical terms used in relation to movements.
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
5 
 
☺Adduction of a limb is the movement toward the body in the coronal plane. 
☺Rotation is the term applied to the movement of a part of the body around 
its long axis.  
☺Circumduction is the combination in sequence of the movements of 
flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction. 
SOME BASIC ANATOMICAL STRUCTURES 
SKIN 
The skin covers the body surface. It protects the deeper structures, and plays 
an important role in regulation of body temperature. It is formed of two layers, 
the superficial layer, the epidermis, and the deep layer, the dermis (Fig.3).  
The epidermis is a keratinized stratified epithelium (several layers). It has a 
tough, horny superficial layer that provides a protective outer surface 
overlying its basal layer. The epidermis has no blood vessels. The avascular 
epidermis is nourished by the underlying vascularized dermis. 
The dermis is composed of dense connective tissue containing many blood 
vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves. These fibers provide skin tone and 
account for the strength and toughness of skin. 
The skin appendages are hair follicles, sebaceous glands, sweat glands 
(fig.3) and the nails (fig.4).  
►The nails are keratinized plates on the dorsal surfaces of the tips of the 
fingers and toes. The proximal edge of the plate is the root of the nail 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.3: Structure of the skin. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hair follicles are invaginations of the epidermis into the dermis. The follicles 
lie obliquely to the skin surface. 
Sebaceous glands lie within the dermis on the sloping undersurface of the 
follicles. They pour their secretion, the sebum, onto the shafts of the hairs as 
they pass up through the necks of the follicles. 
Sweat glands are long, spiral, tubular glands distributed over the surface of 
the body except the red margins of the lips, the nail beds, and the glans penis 
and clitoris. 
FASCIAE 
The fasciae of the body may be divided into two types, the superficial and the 
deep. They lie between the skin and the underlying muscles and bones. 
1-The superficial fascia, or subcutaneous tissue, is a mixture of loose 
areolar and adipose tissue that unites the dermis of the skin to the underlying 
deep fascia.  
It allows the skin to move more or less freely over the underlying structures. 
It conducts the blood vessels and nerves which supply the skin, is an 
important factor in preventing the loss of body heat and gives the body its 
contour. 
It is dense in the scalp, back of the neck, palms of the hands and soles of 
the feet. 
It is very thin over the dorsal aspects of the hands, feet, sides of neck and 
face.  
It is most distinct at the lower part of the anterior abdominal wall, limbs and 
perineum. 
 
With the exception of the distal edge 
of the plate, the nail is surrounded 
and overlapped by folds of skin 
known as the nail folds. The surface 
of skin covered by the nail is the nail 
bed. 
►Hairs are distributed over the 
whole surface of the body except the 
lips, the palms of the hands, the 
sides of the fingers, the glans penis 
and clitoris, the labia minora and the 
internal surface of the labia majora, 
and the soles and sides of the feet 
and the sides of the toes. 
Fig.4: 
The nail. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
7 
 
Contents:  
1-Fat: It contains a variable quantity of fat except in the eyelids, the nose, 
external ear, the penis, and the scrotum. 
2-Muscles: 
■In the face and neck it contains numerous somatic muscles ex. platysma. 
■In the scrotum, it contains the visceral dartos muscle, which corrugates the 
scrotal skin and helps to support the testes, as well as altering the surface 
area of the scrotum to control heat loss from it. 
3- Mammary gland: in the pectoral region 
4- Blood vessels, nerves and lymphatic vessels. 
2-The deep fascia: 
It is a thin dense membrane located deep to the superficial fascia. It is 
loosely attached to the superficial fascia (Fig.5).  
It is inelastic, forming sheath for the muscles and preserving the contour of 
the limb. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
deep fascia 
sends 
various 
intramuscular septa from its deep 
surface to connect it to the bone. 
These septa divide the limb into 
different groups of muscles. 
It is thickened in the palm of the hand 
and sole of the foot. 
It is absent in the abdomen allowing it to
change its volume during respiration. 
 
Fig.5: Section through the 
arm, to show arrangement of 
superficial and deep fascia.  
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
8 
 
MUSCLES 
Definition: Muscles are the red flesh of the body. They are tissues 
specialized to produce motion by contraction. 
Types: There are three types of muscular tissue: 
1- 
Skeletal or voluntary: They are stripped (striated) and under the control 
of will.  
Examples of skeletal muscles are muscles of limbs. 
2- 
Smooth or involuntary: They are not under the control of will.  
They are non stripped muscle. Examples of this type are muscles of intestine, 
uterus and urinary bladder. 
3- 
Cardiac: Involuntary, partially stripped. 
The function of all three types of muscles is contraction and relaxation. The 
skeletal muscles mostly pass from one bone to another across a joint. By 
contraction they approximate the sites of attachment. The cardiac muscle and 
smooth muscles form the walls of the cavities and tubes; so by their 
contraction they expel their contents. 
Gross anatomy of the skeletal (striated muscle) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☺The skeletal muscle is formed of  
1-Fleshy part of the belly (Fig. 6). 
2-Non-fleshy part by which the muscle is 
attached into a bone. It may be cord like 
(tendon), or sheet like (aponeurosis). 
Muscle attachments: Skeletal muscle 
is attached by origin and insertion. 
a) Origin: It is fixed, less mobile 
attachment. It is the proximal attachment 
of limb muscle. 
b) Insertion: It is less fixed, more mobile. 
 
It is the distal attachment of the limb 
muscle. 
Fig. 6: Origin, insertion, and 
belly of gastrocnemius muscle. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
9 
 
Muscle forms (Fig. 7): Different forms of muscles are present and described 
according to the direction of their muscle fibers. 
1- 
Strap or parallel muscle fibers e.g. sartorius. 
2- 
Fusiform: Spindle shaped fleshy belly and terminal tendon e.g. biceps 
brachii. 
3- 
Pennate: 
a) Unipennate: When its tendon appears on one side of the fleshy fibers, an 
example is palmar interossei muscles. 
b)Bipennate: When the fleshy fibers are attached to the tendons at angles 
on both sides e.g. The rectus femoris. 
c) Multipennate: When muscle has several tendinous elements to which the 
fleshy fibers reach from several directions e.g. deltoid. 
d) Circumpennate: the fibers are arranged in a circurmradial manner around 
the central tendon e.g. the tibialis anterior muscle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Joints 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7: The different forms of internal structure of skeletal muscle. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
10 
 
JOINTS 
A joint is the articulation between two or more bones. 
Classification (Figs.8&9): 
1- Fibrous joints are of three types: 
1) The sutures of the vault of the skull where the fibrous tissue is very thin 
(sutural ligaments).No movement is allowed. 
2) Gomphosis as fixation of the teeth in the alveolar sockets 
3) Syndesmoses where the two bones are connected by collagenous 
interosseous ligament, membrane or cord. Slight movement is allowed. 
Examples as the inferior tibiofibular joints and interosseous membranes in the 
forearm and leg. 
 
 
2- Cartilaginous joints may be divided into two types, primary and 
secondary.  
A) Primary cartilaginous joint is one in which the bones are united by a 
plate of hyaline cartilage that ossifies later on. Thus, the union between the 
epiphysis and the diaphysis of a growing bone and that between the first rib 
and the manubrium sterni are examples of such a joint. No movement is 
possible. 
B) Secondary cartilaginous joint (symphysis) is one in which the bones 
are united by a plate of fibrocartilage, and the articular surfaces of the bones 
are covered by a thin layer of hyaline cartilage. Examples are the 
manibrusternal junction, the intervertebral disc and the symphysis pubis. The 
amount of movement possible is dependent on the physical qualities of the 
fibrocartilage. 
3- Synovial joint: It is composed of: 
a) Bony articular ends, which are usually large and smooth. 
b) Articular cartilage covers the articular surface of the ends of bones. Its 
elasticity is useful for the load distribution. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8: Examples of three types of joints: (A) fibrous joint 
(coronal suture of skull), (B) cartilaginous joint (joint between 
two lumbar vertebral bodies), and (C) synovial joint (hip joint). 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Syndesmoses
 
Sutures
 
Gomphosis
 
 
Primary cartilaginous 
joint
 
Synovial joint
 
 
Secondary cartilaginous 
joint
 
Fig.9: Types of joints 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
13 
 
c) Fibrous articular capsule connects the two bony ends together. It may be 
thickened in parts to form ligaments. 
d) Synovial membrane and synovial fluid. The inner surface of the articular 
fibrous capsule is lined by a synovial membrane. It is a highly vascular 
membrane which covers all the intracapsular structures except the articular 
surface.It secretes a small amount of synovial fluid to lubricate the 
movements and to nourish the articular cartilage. 
e) The blood and nerve supply of the synovial joint is conveyed through 
arteries and nerves that pierce the fibrous capsule. 
►►►TYPES OF SYNOVIAL JOINTS (Fig. 10):  
Synovial joints may be classified according to the arrangement of the articular 
surfaces and the types of movement that are possible. 
1-Plane joints: The apposed articular surfaces are flat or almost flat, and this 
permits the bones to slide upon one another. Examples of plane joints are 
carpal and tarsal joints. 
2-Hinge joints: These joints resemble the hinge on a door, (uniaxial joint). 
Examples of hinge joints are elbow and ankle joints. 
3-Pivot joints: In these joints, there is a central bony pivot surrounded by a 
bony-ligamentous ring. In this type of joint, rotation is the only movement 
possible (uniaxial joint). The atlanto-axial and superior radioulnar joints are 
good examples. 
4-Condyloid joints: These joints have two distinct convex surfaces that 
articulate with two concave surfaces. The metacarpophalangeal joints 
(knuckle joints) are examples.  
5-Ellipsoid joints: In these joints, there is an elliptical convex articular 
surface that fits into an elliptical concave articular surface. The wrist joint 
(radio-carpal) is a good example (biaxial). 
6-Saddle joints: In these joints, the articular surfaces are reciprocally 
concavoconvex and resemble a saddle on a horse's back. The best example 
of this type of joint is the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb (multi-axial joint). 
7-Ball-and-socket joints: This arrangement permits very free movements 
(multi-axial joint). The shoulder and hip joints are good examples. 
JOINTS STABILITY: 
 
The stability of a joint depends on three main factors: (1) the shape, size, 
and arrangement of the articular surfaces, (2) the ligaments, and (3) the tone 
of the muscles around the joint. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (10): Examples of the different types of synovial joints: (A) 
plane joints (sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints), (B) 
hinge joint (elbow joint), (C) pivot joint (atlanto-axial joint), (D) 
condyloid joint (metacarpophalangeal joint), (E) ellipsoid joint 
(wrist joint), (F) saddle joint (carpometacarpal joint of the 
thumb), and (G) ball-and-socket joint (hip joint). 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
15 
 
BONES  
Bone is a living tissue capable of changing its structure as the result of the 
stresses to which it is subjected. 
►►Functions of bones: 
1- Bodily Support: It forms the supporting framework of the body.  
2-Motion: Bones give attachment to the muscles and are essential for 
locomotion. 
3-Leverage: Bones serve as a lever for the muscles, as seen in the long 
bones of the limbs. 
4- Protection. The skeleton protects certain soft structures within the human 
body. An example is the skull, which surrounds the brain and the thoracic 
cage which protect the heart and lungs. 
5- Formation of blood cells. Blood cells are manufactured in the red bone 
marrow, mainly found in flat bones. 
6- Storage for salts as calcium and phosphorus. 
A) Types of bones according to general shape (figs11,12B): 
1- 
Long: It is made up of an elongated tubular shaft and two enlarged 
ends. It form levers e.g. bones of the limbs as humerus and femur. 
2- 
Short small: Strengthen an area of skeleton with limited movement e.g. 
carpal and tarsal bones. 
3- 
Flat: It protects certain structure e.g. bones of skull or provides a wide 
surface for muscular attachment e.g. scapula. 
4- 
Irregular: Have a variable shape e.g. hip bone. 
5- 
Pneumatic: The central part of the bone is absorbed. It is replaced by 
air-filled spaces e.g. air sinuses. 
6-Sesamoid bones are small nodules of bone that are found in certain 
tendons where they rub over bony surfaces. The function of a sesamoid bone 
is to reduce friction. The largest sesamoid bone is the patella, which is 
situated in the tendon of the quadriceps femoris (fig.11). 
B) Types of bones according to structure : Bone exists in two forms:  
a)  Compact bone: Outer layer. It is hard substance (Fig.13). 
b) Cancellous (Spongy) bone: consists of a branching network of 
trabeculae with intervening spaces that contains red marrow..The trabeculae 
are arranged in such a manner as to resist the stresses and strains to which 
the bone is exposed. 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11:Sections of different types of 
bones. A Long bone (humerus). B 
Irregular bone (calcaneum). C Flat bone 
(two parietal bones separated by the 
sagittal 
suture).D 
Sesamoid 
bone 
(patella).E 
Note 
arrangement 
of 
trabeculae to act as struts to resist both 
compression and tension forces in upper 
end of femur
Humerus
 
Scapula
 
Fig. 12B: Examples 
for types of bones
 
Fig.12A: The vertebral column. 
 
Vertebra
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
17 
 
                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♦♦♦Flat bones of skull are composed of outer and inner tables of compact 
bone enclosing a layer of spongy bone called dipole. 
C) Types of bones according to region: 
a) Axial skeleton includes the skull, hyoid 
bone, the vertebral column, the 
sternum and the ribs (fig.14).  
b) Appendicular skeleton includes the bones of the appendages i.e. upper 
limb with shoulder (pectoral) girdle and lower limb with pelvic girdle.  
The skull together with the mandible forms the skeleton of the head 
The vertebral column is formed of series of bones called vertebrae.  
It is formed of five regions (Fig.12A) which are: the cervical region (7 
vertebrae), the thoracic region (12 vertebrae), the lumbar region (5 
vertebrae), the sacral region (5 vertebrae), and the coccygeal region (3- 5 
vertebrae). 
Some details on long bones: 
☺Each long bone is formed of two 
ends 
(epiphyses) 
and 
a 
shaft 
(diaphysis). 
☺The 
shaft 
is 
composed 
of 
compact bone (cortex) encloses a 
cavity called medullary cavity filled 
with bone marrow (fig.13). 
☺The shaft is covered by a thick 
layer of fibrous tissue called the 
periosteum(fig. 13). 
Fig.13: Parts and structure 
of long bone. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
18 
 
The thoracic vertebrae with sternum ribs and costal cartilages form the 
skeleton of the thoracic cage. 
The sacral vertebrae are united into a single triangular bone called sacrum. 
Together with two hip bones, the sacrum forms the pelvis. 
N.B.: The vertebrae articulate with one another by means of intervertebral 
discs and synovial joints. 
The skeleton of the limbs (upper or lower), each limb consists of three 
segments; proximal, intermediate and distal. 
The proximal segment consists of one bone: the humerus in the arm and the 
femur in the thigh. 
The intermediate segment consists of two bones: the radius and ulna in the 
forearm - the tibia and fibula in the leg. 
The distal segment consists of three sets of bones: 
1. Some small bones:  carpal bones in the hand - tarsal bones in the foot. 
2. Five elongated bones: metacarpals in the hand – metatarsals in the foot. 
3. The digits: three in each finger or toe except the thumb and the big toe 
where they are two. 
The shoulder (or pectoral) girdle consists of the clavicle and the scapula while 
the pelvic girdle consists of the hip bone. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.14: The skeleton. A. Anterior view. B. Lateral view.
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
20 
 
Digestive System 
The digestive system includes: 
●The alimentary (gastro-intestinal) tract.  
●Certain accessory (digestive organs) glands. 
The alimentary (gastro-intestinal) tract is the tube in which the food travels 
during digestion.  It starts in the mouth to end at the anus. It is formed of the 
following structures: the mouth, the pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small 
intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and ileum) and large intestine (appendix, 
caecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal) (Fig. 15). 
The accessory glands includes salivary glands (parotid, submandibular and 
sublingual), liver, pancreas and spleen. 
♣♣ Mouth: The mouth is divided  
►The vestibule of the mouth is a cleft like space separating the lips and 
cheeks from the teeth and gums. 
►Mouth proper is the rest of the mouth cavity, which is enclosed by the 
teeth. Its floor is formed by the tongue and its roof is formed by the hard and 
soft palate, which is covered by a mucous membrane. 
♣♣ Lips and cheeks: 
The lips and cheeks are composed chiefly of muscles and fat covered with 
skin and lined with mucous membrane. 
♣♣ Gums: 
Gums are dense fibrous tissues covered with mucous membrane, attached to 
the alveolar border of the jaws. It is adherent around the neck of the teeth. 
♣♣ Teeth: 
Permanent teeth:A full set of adult teeth consists of 32 (16 per jaw). Eight (8) 
in each half jaw counting from before backwards are: 2 incisors, 1 canine, 2 
premolars, and 3 molars. Eruption of permanent teeth begins at 6 years of 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
21 
 
age and ends at 12 years. The third permanent molar erupts around 18 years 
(Wisdom tooth). 
Primary or milk teeth:  
They are 20 in number. 5 in each half jaw, counting from before backwards 
are two incisors, one canine and two molars. Eruption of deciduous teeth 
starts at 6 months of age and is completed at two years. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The mucous membrane of the anterior ⅔ is roughened by the presence of 
papillae that is responsible for taste sensation. 
 ♣♣ Pharynx: It is a wide 12 cm muscular tube that extends from the base of 
the skull to the level of the 6th cervical vertebra where it is continuous with the 
oesophagus. It is divided by the soft palate and epiglottis into three parts; 
nasopharynx, oropharynx and laryngopharynx. 
 
Fig.  15: The digestive system. 
♣♣ Tongue: A fleshy mobile organ, 
present at the floor of the mouth 
and mostly formed by muscles 
covered by a mucosa.  The tongue 
maneuvers the food for chewing 
and swallowing. It is also concerned 
with speech and taste. It is attached 
at the base of the mouth by the 
lingual frenulum. The dorsum of 
the tongue is divided into palatine 
part which occupies the anterior ⅔ 
and pharyngeal part that occupies 
the posterior⅓.  
The two parts are separated by a v-
shaped sulcus terminalis. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
22 
 
1-Nasopharynx: It lies behind the nasal cavities. It is the widest part of the 
pharynx. It is always patent. The pharyngeal end of the auditory tube opens in 
its lateral well. At the junction of the roof and its posterior wall, there is a 
collection of lymphoid follicles forming the pharyngeal tonsils. In children it may 
be enlarged to form adenoids. 
2-Oropharynx: It lies behind the mouth and tongue. Its side wall presents the 
palatine tonsil on each side. 
3-Laryngo-pharynx: It lies behind the larynx. It is continuous with oesophagus 
opposite the lower border of the cricoid cartilage (level of the sixth cervical 
vertebra). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♣♣ Oesophagus: It is a 25 cm muscular and collapsible tube that extends 
from the pharynx above to the stomach below.  It passes through the neck, 
thorax and pierces the diaphragm to open into the cardiac orifice of the 
stomach. Its wall is formed of a muscular coat and mucous membrane. 
♣♣ Stomach:  It is concerned with digestion of food. It is the most dilated part of 
the gut.  It is located under the diaphragm (left cupola), in the epigastric area of 
the abdomen. Its shape and position vary according to its condition and the 
condition of the surrounding viscera. It has 2 orifices, 2 borders and 2 surfaces. 
►Orifices (ends) (Fig. 17): 
The stomach has 2 ends the cardiac and the pyloric ends. The cardiac end lies 
between the oesophagus and the stomach. The pyloric end lies between the 
Fig.16:The pharynx, midline sagittal view. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
23 
 
stomach and the small intestine. The pyloric end is guarded by a strong 
sphincter of circular muscle fibers called the pyloric sphincter. 
►Borders: 
The stomach has 2 borders, right and left. The right border is short and forms 
the lesser curvature. The left border is longer and forms the greater curvature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►Parts: 
The stomach is formed of 
fundus, body and pylorus. 
The fundus is the upper 
bulging 
part 
of 
the 
stomach. 
The 
body 
extends from the fundus to 
the pylorus. The pyloric 
antrum 
leads 
to 
the 
pylorus. The pylorus has a 
canal called pyloric canal 
which ends by a sphincter 
called pyloric sphincter. 
►Surfaces: 
The 
stomach 
has 
two 
surfaces 
anterosuperior 
surface and posteroinferior 
surface. 
The 
anterior 
surface is related to the 
liver, 
diaphragm 
and 
anterior 
wall 
of 
the 
abdomen. 
Fig.  17: The stomach. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
24 
 
The posteroinferior surface is related to structures known as stomach 
bed. These structures are the transverse colon, the pancreas, the 
spleen, the left kidney, the left suprarenal gland and the diaphragm. 
Structures of the stomach bed are separated from the stomach by a 
peritoneal sac called lesser sac cavity. This sac allows distension of the 
stomach. The stomach is almost completely surrounded by peritoneum. 
♣♣ Small intestine: 
The small intestine is concerned with completion of digestion and 
absorption of the digested food. It is formed of duodenum, jejnum and 
ileum. It is about 7 meters long.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►The duodenum: It is the shortest and widest part of small intestine. If 
forms a c-shaped curve around the head of pancreas. It is about 25 cm 
(10 inches) long. The duodenum is usually described to have upper 
(first), descending (second), horizontal (third) and ascending fourth 
Fig.  18 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
25 
 
parts. The fourth part is continuous with the jejunum. The second part of 
the duodenum receives the bile duct and the pancreatic duct (Fig. 19). 
►Jejunum and ileum: It is about 5 to 6 meter in length. It extends from 
the duodeno-jejunal junction to the ileo-cecal junction. It forms a 
number of loops. The proximal two-fifths form the jejunum, while the 
distal three fifths form the ileum. No sharp lines between the two parts. 
The intestinal mucosa is bent into circular folds and many finger-like 
projections form villi. Groups of lymphatic nodules, the Peyer's 
patches are present in the lining of the ileum and prevent bacterial 
invasion. 
♣♣ Large intestine is about 1.5 meters (Fig.20). It begins at the end of 
ileum and terminates at the anal orifice. It is divided into: caecum, 
vermiform appendix, ascending colon, right colic flexure, transverse 
colon, left colic flexure, descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectum and 
anal canal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►Caecum lies in the right iliac fossa. It is a large sac which has a blind 
lower end and is continuous with the ascending colon.The ileum opens 
into the large intestine at the junction between the caecum and 
 
1st 
 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
 
Fig.  19: The duodenum. 
Fig.  20: Large intestine. 
caecum 
Ascending  
colon 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
26 
 
ascending colon. This opening is called ileocecal junction and is 
provided by the ileocecal valve.  
►Vermiform appendix lies in the right iliac region. It is a very narrow 
tube of 12 cm long that opens into the posteromedial aspect of the 
caecum, 2 cm below the ileocecal valve. It contains a large amount of 
lymphoid tissue. 
►Ascending colon begins at the caecum and ascends to the 
undersurface of the liver where it bends to the left forming the right colic 
(hepatic) flexure.  
►Transverse colon begins from the right colic flexure, crossing the 
abdomen into the left, where it curves downwards forming the left colic 
(splenic) flexure. 
►Descending colon begins from the left colic flexure and ends at the 
inlet of the pelvis where it joins the pelvic colon (sigmoid colon) in the 
left iliac fossa.  
►Sigmoid colon forms a loop which lies in the pelvis. It begins at the 
descending colon and ends at the rectum in front of third sacral vertebra. 
►Rectum is about 5 inches (13 cm) long and begins in front of the third 
sacral vertebra as a continuation of the sigmoid colon and it descends 
following the concavity of sacrum and coccyx and ends at the anal 
canal and anus. 
►The anal canal is the terminal part of the large intestine. It is situated 
between the rectum and anus. It is approximately 4 cm long. It is 
surrounded by inner involuntary and outer voluntary sphincters which 
keep the lumen closed. 
 
 
 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
27 
 
Differences between the small and large intestine 
 
Small intestine 
Large intestine 
Length 
It is about 7 meters 
long 
It is about 1.5 meters 
long 
Caliber 
Smaller 
Larger 
Mobility 
Freely mobile 
Less freely mobile 
Teniae coli (3 bands of 
longitudinal muscles) 
Absent 
Present 
Sacculations 
Absent 
Present 
Appendices epiploicae 
(fat ) 
Absent 
Present over the free 
surface of the colon 
except the caecum, the 
appendix and the 
rectum 
The mucous 
membrane 
Has permanent 
folds, called plicae 
circulares 
No plicae circulares 
Villi in mucosa 
Present 
Absent 
Peyer's patches 
(lymphatic 
aggregations) 
Present 
absent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 21: Salivary glands. 
1: Parotid gland; 
2:Submandibular gland; 
3: Sublingual gland. 
 
♣♣ Salivary glands: are 3 pairs  
 
The parotid glands are the largest and 
located in front of the ear.  They open in 
the vestibule of the mouth at Stensen's 
duct.   
 
The submandibular glands are located at 
the base of the mouth where they open 
through the Wharton's ducts. 
 
The sublingual glands are also located at 
the base of the mouth (under the tongue). 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
28 
 
♣♣ Liver is the largest gland in the body concerned with metabolism of 
absorbed food, detoxification of chemicals and secretion of the bile salts 
which emerge from the liver through the right and left hepatic ducts.  
It lies under the right copula of the diaphragm. It is formed of 2 large 
lobes (right and left lobes), (Fig. 22) and 2 small lobes (caudate and 
quadrate lobes) which are present on the under surface of the liver. 
They are separated by (porta hepatis) the hilum of the liver, through 
which vessels and ducts pass. 
Its upper surface is in contact with the diaphragm and with the anterior 
abdominal wall. Its visceral surface is related to many structures. The 
stomach and the lower part of oesophagus are in contact with the left 
lobe. The right lobe is in contact with the hepatic colic flexure, the 
duodenum, the right kidney and the right suprarenal gland. 
The liver secretes the bile-salts which emerge from the liver through the 
right and left hepatic ducts. 
Extra hepatic biliary passages 
♦Hepatic ducts are two, right and left, one from each lobe. They unite 
in the porta hepatis to form the common hepatic duct (Fig. 23).  
♦Common hepatic duct is about 1.5 inches (4 cm) long and is formed 
by the union of the right and left hepatic ducts. It is joined on the right 
side by the cystic duct from the gall bladder to form the bile duct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig.  22: The Liver. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
29 
 
♦Gall bladder is an elongated pear-shaped sac that lies on the inferior 
surface of the right lobe of the liver. It serves as a reservoir for bile, with 
a capacity of about 50 ml and it has the ability to concentrate the bile. 
Bile is delivered to the duodenum as the result of contraction and partial 
emptying of the gall bladder and this mechanism is initiated by the 
entrance of fatty foods into the duodenum.  
♦Cystic duct is about one and half inches long. It joins the common 
hepatic duct to form the bile duct. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♦Common bile duct is formed 
by the union of the cystic duct 
and the common hepatic duct. It 
is about three inches long. It 
opens into the wall of the 
second part of the duodenum 
where 
it 
unites 
with 
the 
pancreatic duct to form the 
hepatopancreatic ampulla.  The  
hepatopancreatic    ampulla  (of  
Fig. 23: Extrahepatic biliary passage. 
Fig. 24: Parts of pancreas. 
Vater) is guarded by a sphincter (of 
Oddi) to control the flow of bile 
.♣♣ Pancreas is a soft lobulated gland. 
It lies transversely across the posterior 
abdominal wall behind the stomach. It 
extends from the duodenum to the 
spleen. It secretes pancreatic juice into 
the duodenum. It also has an endocrine 
function, and secretes insulin directly in 
the blood stream. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
30 
 
The parts of the pancreas are the head (within the duodenal loop), the 
neck, the body (extends upwards and to the left) and the tail which 
reaches the spleen.  
 ♣♣ Spleen is a soft organ and it is the largest single mass of lymphoid 
tissue in the body. It lies in the left hypochondrium. Its long axis is 
parallel with the lower 9, 10, 11 ribs. It has 2 surfaces, 2 borders and 2 
ends.  
The two surfaces are:  
♦The diaphragmatic surface: is smooth and convex. It is related to the 
diaphragm. 
♦The visceral surface is directed towards the abdominal cavity and 
related to the stomach, left kidney, tail of pancreas and left colic flexure.  
The two borders are:  
♦Superior border is characterized by the presence of notches. 
♦Inferior border is smooth and rounded. 
The two ends: 
♦Posterior end which is directed upwards, backwards and medially. 
♦Anterior end which is directed downwards, forwards and laterally. 
THE PORTAL CIRCULATION 
The portal circulation is formed by the veins that carry blood from the 
stomach, small intestine, large intestine, spleen, pancreas and gall 
bladder. The blood is conveyed to the portal vein. It ascends to the 
porta hepatis where it divides into right and left branches. Each passes 
to the corresponding lobe of the liver where it branches until open in the 
liver sinusoids. From the liver, the blood is conveyed to the inferior vena 
cava by 4 hepatic veins (Fig.25). 
The portal vein starts like a vein but ends like an artery by giving 
branches. The portal vein has no valves. It is 7.5 cm long. It is formed 
by the union of the superior mesenteric and splenic veins. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
31 
 
It runs to the liver where it branches into smaller and smaller veins that 
open in the liver sinusoids between cords of the liver cells. The hepatic 
artery brings oxygenated blood to the liver, while the portal vein brings 
venous blood rich in products of digestion which have been absorbed 
from the gastrointestinal tract to the liver to be metabolized. Products of 
metabolism are produced by the liver cells into liver sinusoids, and 
conveyed by central veins (inside liver lobules) into hepatic veins. 
Hepatic veins are 4 in number, 2 from each lobe that drain directly into 
inferior vena cava. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 25: The portal circulation. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
32 
 
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 
Cardiovascular system is the transport system of the body (fig.26), 
through which the nutrients are conveyed to places where these are 
utilized, and the metabolites (waste products) are conveyed to 
appropriate places from where these are expelled. The conveying 
medium is a liquid tissue, the blood, which flows in tubular channels 
called blood vessels. The circulation is maintained by the central 
pumping organ called the heart. 
THE HEART 
The heart is conical hollow muscular pump (Figs. 26,27) inside the 
pericardium occupying a major part in the chest. It has four chambers 
two atria (right and left) and two ventricles (right and left). The two atria 
lie behind the two ventricles. The coronary groove encircles most of the 
upper part of the heart and seperates the atria from the ventricles, also 
division of the ventricles is indicated by the anterior and posterior 
interventricular grooves.It has an apex, base, two surfaces and four 
borders. The surfaces are the sternocostal and diaphragmatic. The 
borders are right, left, upper and lower borders. 
♦Apex is formed only by the left ventricle and is directed downwards, 
forwards and to the left. Pulsations of the apex can be felt below nipple 
of the left breast, in the left 5th intercostal space. 
♦Base is formed mainly by the left atrium and the back of the right 
atrium. It is directed backwards and to the right. lt has a quadrilateral 
shape and lies opposite the bodies of middle thoracic vertebrae (5-8). 
♦Sternocostal surface is directed forwards, upwards and to the left. It 
is divided by the coronary groove into:  
1. Atrial Portion: It is formed mainly by the right auricle and a small 
part of the left atrium. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
33 
 
 2. Ventricular Portion: One third of this surface is formed by left 
ventricle, and two thirds by the right ventricle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♦Diaphragmatic (inferior) surface: 
It is directed downwards and slightly backwards. It is located upon the 
central tendon of the diaphragm which separates it from stomach and 
liver. It is formed by the two ventricles; two thirds by the left ventricle 
and one third by the right ventricle. 
♦Upper border: It is formed by the two atria, mainly the left.  
♦Right border: It is formed only by the right atrium.  
♦Lower border: It is formed by the right ventricle and the apical part of 
left ventricle.  
♦Left border: It is formed mainly by the left ventricle and partly by the 
left atrium. 
 
 
Fig. 26: The heart (Anterior view). 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
34 
 
▼▼Chambers of the heart 
►Right Atrium It forms the right border of the heart between the 
superior and inferior venae cavae (Fig. 26). It is separated from the left 
atrium by the interatrial septum. The right atrium is composed of two 
main parts, a smooth posterior portion and a rough walled anterior 
portion. The anterior part is continuous anteriorly with the right auricle. 
In the large smooth part the following orifices are present (Fig.27): 
1. The inferior vena cava opens into the lower posterior part. It brings 
blood from the lower limbs and abdomen to the right atrium. 
2. The superior vena cava opens into the upper posterior part. It 
brings blood from head, neck, upper limbs and thorax. 
3. Tricuspid valve connects the right atrium with the right ventricle. It is 
guarded by three cusps. 
4. The coronary sinus opens in front and to the left of inferior vena 
cava.It conveys venous blood from the heart wall to the right atrium. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 27: The heart (Posterior view). 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►Left Atrium: 
The left atrium forms the greater part of the base of the heart (Fig. 27). 
It lies behind and to the left of the right atrium. It interior presents a 
smooth surface except for little rough part. The left auricle lies to the left 
and in front of the pulmonary trunk. The left atrium shows the following 
orifices: 
1. The four pulmonary veins two from each lung. 
2. The mitral valve connects the left atrium with the left ventricle. 
►Right ventricle forms the largest part of the sternocostal surface and 
a small part of the diaphragmatic surface.It is separated from the left 
ventricle by interventricular septum. Its wall is muscular and is thicker 
than the atrial wall. The pulmonary trunk arises from the right ventricle 
and divides into two pulmonary arteries one to each lung. There are 
three papillary muscles attached to the wall of the ventricle. From the 
apices of the papillary muscles, fibrous cords (chorda tendinae) pass to 
the cusps of the tricuspid valve (Fig. 29). 
 
Fig. 28: Interior of the right atrium. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►Left ventricle is longer than the right ventricle and forms the apex of 
the heart, its left border, ⅓ of its sternocostal surface and ⅔ of its 
diaphragmatic surface. Its wall is nearly three times thicker than the 
right. The ascending aorta arises from it. The wall of the ventricle 
showed trabeculae carneae, and has 2 papillary muscles (Fig. 29). 
►Pericardium is the fibroserous sac which encloses the heart and the 
roots of its great vessels. It consists of an outer fibrous sac lined with an 
inner serous sac. The heart lies inside the fibrous sac and invaginates 
the serous sac from behind. So the serous pericardium has a visceral 
layer covering the heart and a parietal layer lining the fibrous 
pericardium. The fibrous pericardium limits movements of the heart. 
▼▼Conducting system of the heart 
The conducting system of the heart consists of modified cardiac muscle 
fibers which are responsible for initiation and maintenance of cardiac 
rhythm. The conducting system (Fig. 30) is formed of: 
Fig. 29: Interior of the heart. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then it divides into right and left bundle branches. 
▼▼Blood supply of the heart 
The heart is supplied by two coronary arteries (right and left) which 
arise from the beginning of the ascending aorta. 
▼▼Venous drainage of the heart 
The heart is drained mainly by coronary sinus and to a lesser extent by 
anterior cardiac vein and vena cordis minimi  
►►►Main Branches of the Aorta (Fig. 31) 
*The ascending aorta arises from the left ventricle. It gives two coronary 
arteries; right and, left. The coronary arteries supply the heart. 
*Ascending aorta arches to give the aortic arch which gives 3 arteries: 
1. Brachiocephalic artery which giyes the right subclavian and right 
common carotid arteries. 
2. Left common carotid artery. 
3. Left subclavian artery. 
* The carotid arteries supply the head, neck and brain, 
1. Sino-atrial node (SAA) is 
horse-shoe shaped band in the 
lateral wall of the right atrium. It is 
supplied by the right vagus nerve. 
2. Atrioventricular node (AVN) 
is 
situated 
in 
the 
interatrial 
septum. It is supplied by the left 
vagus nerve. 
3. 
Atrioventricular 
bundle 
(AVB) is a slender bundle which 
extends from   the   A-V node to 
the interventricular septum. 
Fig. 30: Conducting system of the 
heart. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
38 
 
*The subclavian artery continues as axillary artery, then brachial artery 
which divides into radial and ulnar arteries. The continuation of the 
subclavian artery supplies the upper limb. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*The descending thoracic aorta 
descends in the thorax and gives 
branches 
which 
supply 
the 
bronchi, 
oesophagus 
and 
intercostal spades. 
The descending aorta pierces the 
diaphragm 
to 
become 
the 
abdominal aorta. Branches from 
the abdominal aorta supply the 
digestive 
system, 
kidneys, 
suprarenal glands, testes, ovaries 
and 
the 
diaphragm. 
The 
abdominal aorta ends at level of 
the fourth lumbar vertebra by 
givm*g two commonillac arteries.  
Each common iliac artery gives 
External and internal iliac arteries. 
The external iliac continues as 
Femoral artery which will supply 
the lower limb. The internal iliac 
artery 
gives 
branches 
which 
supply the pelvic organs (urinary 
bladder, 
rectum, 
uterus, 
and 
vagina). 
Fig. 31: The aorta 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
39 
 
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
The respiratory system, which buds off the primitive gut, has two 
portions (Fig. 32): (1) conducting and (2) respiratory. 
The conducting Portion, or air passages, comprises: nasal cavities, 
pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi and bronchioles. 
The respiratory Portion comprises: lungs (having respiratory 
bronchioles, alveolar ductules, and alveoli) 
The respiratory system absorbs oxygen, the absorption taking place in 
the alveoli of the lung. Carbon dioxide is eliminated there 
simultaneously. 
►►The conducting portion: 
♦►Nasal Cavities, right and a left, are separated from each other by a 
thin median partition, the nasal septum. The entrance to each cavity, 
the nostril or naris, opens into a vestibule which is lined with hairy skin 
to filter the air. From the side wall of each cavity, three downward 
curved shelves, the conchae, overhang three antero-posteriorly running 
passages, the meatuses. Nasolacrimal (tear) duct opens into the 
inferior meatus while large air sinuses open into the other meatuses. 
♦►Pharynx is a fibro muscular tube, funnel shaped which extends from 
the base of the skull to the level of sixth cervical vertebrae posteriorly 
and lower border of cricoid cartilage anteriorly. It is widest (5 cm) 
opposite the hyoid bone and narrowest at its inferior end where it is 
continuous with the oesophagus. Communicating with it from front are 
the nasal, oral, and laryngeal cavities. So it is divided into three parts 
(upper, middle, and lower), called the nasal, oral, and laryngeal parts, 
respectively. The nasopharynx is the backward extension of the nasal 
cavities. It communicates the nasal cavity with tympanic cavity and it 
has a respiratory function. 
 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♦►Larynx 
The larynx is continuous below with the trachea and opens at the lowest 
part of the pharynx. This voice box is kept rigid by a number of hyaline 
and elastic cartilages which are united by membranes. It is lined with 
mucous membrane internally and covered with voluntary muscles 
externally. The cartilages of the larynx are (Fig. 32): 
A- Single cartilages: 
1. The thyroid cartilage: has two perpendicular laminae which meet in 
front in the middle as the laryngeal prominence (Adam's apple). 
2. The cricoid cartilage: is a complete ring expanded posteriorly into a 
lamina or plate and so resembles a signed ring. 
3. The epiglottic cartilage is leaf, attached to angle of the thyroid 
cartilage. 
 
Fig. 32: Respiratory system. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
41 
 
 
 
 
cartilage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B -Paired cartilages: 
1. The arytenoid cartilages: are paired, small, and pyramidal 
cartilages their bases articulate with the upper border of the lamina of 
the cricoid cartilage. 
2. Corniculate cartilages: one on each side, small nodule of cartilage 
articulates with apices of arytenoid cartilage. 
3. Cuneiform cartilages: are two small, rod –shaped pieces of 
cartilage lying in front of the corniculate cartilage. 
♦►Trachea or windpipe is an elastic tube about 10 cm long. It is kept 
patent by about 20 U-shaped rings of hyaline cartilage which are 
opened posteriorly. At the level of the sternal angle, the trachea 
bifurcates into right and left bronchi. 
♦►Bronchi: Each bronchus, having an oblique course, enters the 
respective lung at the hilus and descends towards the base, giving off 
branches which in turn branch like a tree. The bronchi have the same 
structure as the trachea. When the bronchi are reduced to the diameter 
of 1 mm, they are called bronchioles. The terminal bronchioles divide 
 
 
Fig. 33: Cartilages of the larynx. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
42 
 
into a number of alveolar ductules (2 to 11) which end in dilated air sacs 
(alveolar sacs). 
The right bronchus is short (2.5 cm) wide and on the same line with the 
trachea. The left bronchus is longer (5 cm), narrower and more oblique 
than the right. 
♦►The lungs: 
The right and left lungs are conical in shape (fig. 34). It has an apex and 
base, costal and medial surfaces, anterior and inferior borders and a 
hilus. 
Apex is directed upwards and projects into the root of the neck.  
Base is concave and directed downwards where it is related to the 
diaphragm.   
Anterior border is sharp and thin. 
Lateral (costal) surface is convex and is related to the ribs and 
intercostal spaces. 
 Medial surface contains the hilum of the lung, and is divided into 
mediastinal and vertebral parts: 
a) Mediastinal part: is related to the side of the mediastinum (the heart 
and pericardium) and has the hilum in its posterior. The hilus of the lung 
transmits the main bronchus, one pulmonary artery and two pulmonary 
veins. 
b) Vertebral part: lies behind the hilum and is related to the side of the 
vertebral column.  
▼▼▼Lobes and fissure of the lung: 
* Right lung: is divided into 3 lobes (upper, middle and lower) by 2 
fissures (oblique and horizontal). 
* Left lung: is divided into 2 lobes only (upper and lower) by the oblique 
fissure, which is similar to the oblique fissure of the right lung 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▼▼▼Difference between the right & left lung: 
1. The right lung is divided by two complete fissures into three lobes 
while the left lung is divided by one fissure into two lobes.  
2. The right lung is short and broad (presence of the liver pushes the 
diaphragm upwards on the right side).  
3. The left lung is long and narrow (the heart lies on the left side). 
4. The left lung has a cardiac notch on its anterior border and a lingual 
just below the notch. 
►►►PLEURA: Each lung is covered by a delicate smooth serous 
membrane, the visceral pleura. Another layer of pleura lines the ribs, 
diaphragm, and mediastinum, this is the parietal pleura. Both the 
parietal and visceral pleura are continuous at the hilum of the lung. The 
potential space between the parietal and visceral pleura is the pleural 
cavity. 
Fig. 34: The lungs. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
44 
 
Diaphragm 
The diaphragm forms a musculofibrous partition between the thoracic 
and abdominal cavities. It has convex upper surface which forms the 
floor of the thoracic cavity. Its concave lower surface forms the roof of 
the abdominal cavity. 
The diaphragm takes origin from the circumference of the outlet of the 
thorax. 
The fibers converge from their origin to be inserted into the central 
tendon of the diaphragm. This is a thin, but strong, aponeurotic tendon 
formed of interlacing fibers which run in different directions. 
Action: 
The diaphragm is the chief muscle of inspiration. It also has an 
important role in expulsive acts e.g. defecation, urination and 
parturition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Major openings in the 
diaphragm (fig.35): 
1- Vena caval opening: At 
the level of eighth thoracic 
vertebra. 
2-Oesophageal opening: 
At 
the 
level 
of 
tenth 
thoracic vertebra. 
3- Aortic opening:  At the 
level of the last thoracic 
vertebra. 
 
Fig. 35: Major openings in the 
diaphragm. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
45 
 
URINARY SYSTEM 
The urinary system is composed of 2 kidneys, 2 ureters, urinary bladder 
and urethra. 'The kidneys excrete urine. This passes down two 
muscular tubes, the ureters, into the urinary bladder which is a 
muscular organ. The urine is stored the urinary bladder and is 
discharged through the urethra. 
♦►THE KIDNEY (fig.36) 
Kidneys position:  
●The kidneys lie on the posterior abdominal wall, one on each side of 
the vertebral column, behind the peritoneum. 
●Each kidney extends from the level of the 12th thoracic vertebra to the 
level of the 3rd lumbar vertebra with its long axis directed downwards 
and laterally. The right kidney is slightly lower than the left one. 
 Shape, size & features: 
●Each kidney is bean shape, about 12 cm in length, 6 cm in width and 3 
cm in thickness. It has 2 borders (medial and lateral), 2 surfaces 
(anterior and posterior) and 2 ends (upper and lower). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 36: Urinary system. A) In female. B) In 
male. 
A 
B 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
46 
 
● The lateral border is convex, the medial border is convex at both 
ends and concave in the middle and presents the hilum of the kidney 
which gives passage to the renal vessels and nerves and the pelvis of 
the kidney.  
● The anterior surface faces forwards and laterally. In the right side, 
this surface is related to the right suprarenal gland, second part of 
duodenum, right lobe of liver, right colic flexure and coils of small 
intestine. In the left side, the anterior surface is related to the left 
suprarenal gland, the spleen, the body of pancreas, the stomach, the 
descending colon and coils of small intestine.  
●The posterior surfaces of the kidneys face backwards and medially. 
It is related to the diaphragm, and muscles of posterior abdominal wall. 
The kidney is surrounded by a thin fibrous capsule. The tissue of the 
kidney is differentiated into an outer cortex and an inner medulla. The 
cortex lies under the capsule. Cortical tissue also extends between the 
pyramids of the medulla. The medulla is formed of 10 to 18 pyramids. 
The base of each pyramid is directed towards the cortex. The apex of 
the pyramid projects into the renal sinus. 
●Pelvis of the kidney is a dilated sac which occupies the renal sinus. It 
extends outside the hilum to be continuous with the ureter. 
●Coverings of the kidney: 
1) Fibrous capsule is closely surrounds the kidney, and is continuous 
into the renal sinus to line its walls. 
2)Perirenal (perinephric)fat: It lies just to the outside of the capsule. 
3) Renal fascia. 
4) Pararenal (paranephric) fat: It is a large mass of fat situated outside 
the renal fascia especially behind the kidney. 
●Arteries of kidneys: Right and left renal arteries from abdominal 
aorta. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
47 
 
♦►URETERS 
●The ureters are two muscular tubes one on each side. They convey 
urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder. Each is 25 to 30 cm in 
length. Half of its course is in the abdomen, while the other half is in the 
pelvis.  
● The ureters begin inside the sinus of the kidney in the form of a 
dilated part called the renal pelvis. They descend on the posterior 
abdominal wall opposite tips of the lumber transverse processes. The 
ureters enter the pelvis and curve forwards and medially to reach the 
posterosuperior angle of the urinary bladder, where they open with a 
valve like opening. 
●The ureter passes obliquely in the wall of the bladder for 1 inch before 
it opens into its cavity at the lateral angle of the trigone. This part of the 
ureter is the narrowest and is called the intramural part. Another two 
sites of anatomical constrictions in the course of the ureter are at the 
pelvi-ureteric junction and where the ureter crosses the common iliac 
artery. At these sites, stone impaction may occur. 
♦►URINARY BLADDER 
●It is a hollow viscus with strong muscular wall which serves as a 
reservoir for urine. 
●Position:-The urinary bladder lies in the pelvic cavity directly behind 
the pubic bones, only separated from them by the retropubic space. 
●Shape: It is pyramidal in shape with an apex (directed anteriorly), 
base (directed posteriorly) and 3 surfaces. It has the capacity of 220cc 
but can accommodate up to 500 cc without discomfort. 
Apex lies behind the upper part of the symphysis pubis. It is continuous 
with the median umbilical ligament (the fibrosed urachus of the foetus). 
The base triangular in shape in the male is related to the seminal 
vesicles and ampulla of vas deferens on each side. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The surfaces of the bladder are one superior and two inferolateral, 
each one is triangular in shape. In male, the superior surface is related 
to the pelvic colon and coils of small intestine. In female it is related to 
the anterior surface of the uterus and coils of small intestine.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In female it is related to the cervix 
of the uterus and anterior wall of 
the 
vagina. 
The 
superolateral 
angles of the base are joined by 
the ureters, and the inferior angle 
gives rise to the urethra. 
The neck in male, the neck rests 
on 
the 
prostate 
gland 
and 
continuous with the prostatic part 
of the urethera, in female it is 
continuous with the urethra. 
Fig. 37: Urinary bladder. 
 
 Internal urethral orifice:  It is 
placed at the lowest part of 
the bladder.  It is surrounded 
by an involuntary non-striated 
muscle forming the sphincter 
vesicae.  
Arteries 
of 
the 
urinary 
bladder:  
1 - Superior vesical artery.  
2- Inferior vesical artery.  
 
Fig. 38 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
49 
 
♦►MALE URETHRA 
●Shape & course: The male urethra is S-shaped, 20 cm. in length. It 
extends from the internal urethral orifice at the neck of the urinary 
bladder to the external urethral orifice at the tip of the penis. 
●Division: It is divided into 3 parts: prostatic, membranous and spongy. 
1) Prostatic urethra: It measures 3 cm in length. It is the widest and 
most dilatable part of the whole urethra. It passes downward and 
forward through the prostate gland from its base and emerges from 
anterior aspect of the prostate a little above its apex. The ejaculatory 
ducts open into the prostatic urethra. 
2) Membranous urethra:  It is 1-2 cm long. It extends from the apex of 
the prostate to the bulb of the penis, being placed 1 inch below and 
behind the pubic symphysis. 
3) Spongy (penile) urethra: It is 15–16 cm in length long. It extends 
from the end of the membranous urethra where it receives the ducts of 
the two bulbo-urethral glands. It ends at external urethral orifice on the 
glans penis. 
►►Sphincters of the urethra: 
1) Internal urethral sphincter (sphincter vesicae): consists of non-
striated muscle fibers (involuntary), and surrounds the internal urethral 
orifice and neck of the bladder. 
2) External urethral sphincter (sphincter urethrae): consists of 
striated muscle fibers (voluntary), and surrounds the membranous 
urethra 
♦►FEMALE URETHRA: It is 4 cm long. It begins at the internal 
urethral orifice and opens into the vestibule of the vagina by the 
external urethral orifice which lies directly in front of the vaginal orifice, 1 
inch below and behind the clitoris. 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
50 
 
REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS 
THE MALE GENITAL SYSTEM 
The male reproductive organs are: The testes, epididymes, ductus 
deferens, seminal vesicles, ejaculatory ducts, prostate and bulbo- 
urethral glands. The external genital organs are the penis and the 
scrotum (fig.39). 
♦►SCROTUM: It is a sac of skin containing the 2 testes and lower 
parts of the spermatic cords (of both sides).  
▪Arterial supply: External pudendal arteries (superficial and deep): from 
the femoral artery. 
▪Nerve supply: Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1). 
▪Lymphatic drainage: The wall of the scrotum drains into the superficial 
inguinal lymph nodes 
♦►TESTIS 
●The testis is the primary male sex organ which lies in the scrotum, one 
on each side of the median septum.  
● It measures 5 cm in length and 2.5 cm in breadth and 3cm in 
anteroposterior diameter is suspended by the spermatic cord. 
● It is oval in shape having 2 borders (anterior and posterior), 2 ends 
(upper and lower) and 2 surfaces (lateral and medial).  
Each testis has anterior and posterior borders, and 2 surfaces, medial 
and lateral. It has a thick fibrous capsule, the tunica albuginea. 
The testis is composed of numerous convoluted, seminiferous, tubules. 
Each tubule is about 2 feet in length. They produce the male sex cells, 
the sperms. From the upper part of the testis, about 6-12 fine ducts 
(efferent ductules) arise. They open into the duct of the epididymis 
(fig.40). The testes are present in the scrotum where the temperature is 
less than that of the body to favour the process of spermatogenesis 
(formation of spermatozoa).  
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♦►TUNICA VAGINALIS:  The tunica vaginalis is formed by the 
terminal blind end of the processus vaginalis which is invaginated by 
the testis. This processus vaginalis is an evagination of peritoneum 
which extends into the inguinal canal down to the scrotum in the fetus. 
Blood supply and lymphatic drainage of the testes: 
▪Arterial supply: by the testicular artery from abdominal artery. 
▪Venous drainage: The right testis drains into the inferior vena cava 
while the left testis drains into the left renal vein.  
▪Lymphatic drainage: into the lateral aortic lymph nodes.  
♦►EPIDIDYMIS(fig.40):  
● It is a highly coiled duct that lies on the posterior border of the testis.  
● It has the following parts: 1) An expanded head caps the upper pole 
of the testis where it is connected with the efferent ductules. 2) A body. 
3) A narrow tail attached to the lower end of the testis and is continuous 
with the ductus deferens. 
  
Fig. 39: Male genital system. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
52 
 
●The epididymis secretes the mucoid secretions which carry the 
spermatozoa. Spermatozoa are stored and matured in the epididymis 
until ejaculated. 
♦►SPERMATIC CORD 
▪Position: It lies in the inguinal canal as well as in the scrotum.It 
extends from the lower end of the testis (below) to the deep inguinal 
ring (above) where the ductus deferens enters the pelvis. The left cord 
is a little longer than the right one. 
▪Contents: 
1) Ductus (vas) deferens: It is the duct which transfers the sperms 
from the testis, and is characterized by having a thick muscular wall and 
a narrow lumen. Each vas deferens connects the duct of the epididymis 
to the urethra. It is 45 cm long. It ascends through the spermatic cordto 
the abdominal wall, where it passes into the pelvis from the deep 
inguinal ring. On the pelvic wall, it lies behind the peritoneum to reach 
the base of the urinary bladder. It unites with the duct of the seminal 
vesicle to form the ejaculatory duct. 
2) Artery of the ductus deferens. 
3) Vessels and nerves of the testis. 
a- Testicular artery: arises from the abdominal aorta 
b- Sympathetic fibers: surround the testicular artery forming the 
testicular plexus. 
c- Pampiniform plexus of veins: this is a plexus formed by several veins 
which emerge from the back of the testis. 
d- Lymph vessels: drain the testes and epididymis and accompany the 
testicular blood vessels up to the lateral aortic lymph nodes. 
4) Vestige of the processus vaginalis: It is a fibrous strand which 
represents the obliterated remains of the processus vaginalis 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
53 
 
♦►THE EJACULATORY DUCTS: Each ejaculatory duct is 2 cm long 
and pierces the prostate to open into the prostatic urethra close to its 
fellow. 
♦►THE SEMINAL VESICLE (fig.41): 
The seminal vesicles are two pear shaped lobulated pouches that 
secrete alkaline secretion of the seminal fluid. Each is 5 cm long. They 
lie on each side of the base of the urinary bladder. Their ducts unite 
with the ductus deferens to form the ejaculatory ducts. 
♦►THE PROSTATE: 
The prostate is a fibromuscular accessory gland which encircles the 
neck of the urinary bladder. It is conical in shape, having a base, an 
apex, anterior, posterior, and two inferolateral surfaces. The base is 
directed upwards, continuous with the neck of the urinary bladder. The 
apex is directed downwards. The prostate measures 4 cm in the 
transverse diameter, 3 cm in the vertical diameter and 2 cm in the 
anteroposterior diameter.  The prostate produces the majority of the 
volume of the seminal fluid. Secretions of the prostate are rich in 
enzymes which liquefy the semen to allow sperms to travel the female 
genitalia. 
♦►THE BULBOURETHRAL GLANDS: 
A pair of pea sized yellowish glands. They lie within the sphincter 
urethra. Their ducts open into the spongy part of urethra. 
♦►THE PENIS: The penis is formed of two main parts, the root which 
lies in the perineum and the body which is the free part of the penis. Its 
anterior end is enlarged to form the glans penis. The body is formed of 
three elongated erectile bodies, one ventral and two dorsal. The ventral 
body is the corpus spongiosum, and the dorsal bodies are the corpora 
cavernosa.The root is formed of a bulb and two crura. The bulb is the 
posterior expanded part of the corpus spongiosum. The crura are the 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
54 
 
posterior parts of the corpora cavernosa. The urethra traverses the 
corpus spongiosum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 40: Cut section in the testis and epididymis. 
Fig. 41: Prostate, seminal vesicle and Ejaculatory duct. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
55 
 
THE FEMALE GENITAL ORGANS 
The female reproductive organs are two ovaries, two uterine tubes, a 
uterus and a vagina. The parts of external genitalia are clitoris, mons 
pubis, labia majora, labia minora, greater vestibular glands and vaginal 
orifice. 
♦►OVARY 
● Position: ovaries are present in the pelvis, in the ovarian fossa, one 
on each side of the uterus, on the back of broad ligament.  
●Shape and size: The ovary is almond-shaped. It is about 5 cm long 
1.5 cm wide and 1 cm in thickness.  
●Features: It has smooth surface before puberty, become irregular with 
aging. At birth each ovary contains about 200,000 immature ova, from 
puberty to the end of reproductive period, one ovum is released every 
other months from each the ovary. The monthly release of an ovum is 
called ovulation. 
UTERUS 
●Shape and site: 
The uterus is a thick-walled muscular pear-shaped organ situated in the 
lesser pelvis between the rectum behind and urinary bladder in front. 
●Size: It measures 3 inches in length, 2 inches in width and 1 inch in 
thickness. 
●Openings: Above, a uterine tube opens into the uterus on each side, 
below the uterus opens into the vagina. 
● Divisions: The uterus is divided into 3 parts, fundus, body and cervix. 
Fundus: It is the part above the entrance of the uterine tubes. It is 
convex in all directions and related to coils of small intestine. 
Body: It is formed of a main part (2 inches long) and the cervix. It 
narrows from the fundus to the cervix. Its anterior surface is flattened; 
its posterior surface is convex.  
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
56 
 
Cervix: It is about 1 inch long and 1 inch thick. It projects through the 
vagina, so its upper ½ is above the vagina (supravaginal part) and the 
lower ½lies inside the vagina (vaginal part). It is more cylindrical than 
the body and more fixed by ligaments. The cavity of the cervix, the 
cervical canal, is spindle shaped and communicates with cavities of the 
uterus and vagina through the internal os and the external os, 
respectively. 
N.B.: The wall of the uterus consists of 3 layers: 1. Perimetrium: The 
outer coat of peritoneum. 2. Myometrium: The middle muscular coat, 
12-15 mm. thick. 3. Endometrium: The inner mucous coat. 
During the fertile period of female (13 years - 45 years) the 
endometrium. exhibits cyclical changes every 4 weeks. these changes 
take place to prepare the endometrium each month to receive a 
fertilized ovum, so pregnancy may occur. If implantation does not occur 
shedding of the endometrium occurs (menstruation) which is followed 
by repair and a new cycle. These cyclical changes of the endometrium 
of the fertile female are called the menstrual cycle. 
●Position of the uterus:  The uterus is usually not exactly in the 
median plane. Its fundus is slightly tilted to the right, while the cervix 
and upper part of vagina are slightly tilted to the left. The position of the 
uterus is described as being anteflexed and anteverted which means 
the following: 
1- Anteflexed position: the body of the uterus bent forwards on itself at 
the level of internal os to form an angle of about 170.  
2- Anteverted position: the long axis of the whole uterus (body and 
cervix) makes a right angle with the long axis of the vagina. This angle 
faces forwards and downwards. In some women, the uterus may 
acquire an abnormal position of retroversion and retroflexion. 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
57 
 
●Blood supply of the uterus: 
1) Uterine artery is a branch of the internal iliac artery. 
2) Uterine vein ends in the internal iliac vein  
♦►UTERINE TUBES 
●The Fallopian tube is 10 cm long, and lies in the free anterior border of 
the broad ligament. 
● It extends laterally from the lateral angle of the uterus to the ovary 
where the tube curves around it.  
● It has 2 openings: a medial opening into the uterine cavity, and a 
lateral or abdominal opening which opens into the peritoneal cavity. The 
abdominal opening is funnel shaped (the infundibulum). The uterine 
tube receives the ovum from the ovary and propels it into the uterine 
cavity. 
Parts of the Fallopian tube: 
●The uterine tube has 4 parts: uterine part, isthmus, ampulla and 
infundibulum (from medial to lateral).  
Arterial supply: by the uterine artery and ovarian artery. 
 Venous drainage: into ovarian and uterine veins. 
♦►VAGINA: 
 It is a collapsed musculomembranous canal which connects the uterus 
with the vestibule. It lies between the bladder and the urethra anteriorly 
and the rectum and anal canal posteriorly. It anterior wall is 7 cm and its 
posterior wall in 9 cm. The anterior wall is pierced by the cervix. The 
vagina forms a gutter around the cervix known as vaginal fornices. 
Arterial supply: by the 1) Vaginal artery. 2) Uterine artery. 
 Venous drainage: into vaginal vein which drains into internal iliac veins 
and communicates with vesical, uterine and rectal venous plexuses. 
 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VULVA  
The external genital organ of female is the vulva. The vulva consists of: 
1. Mons pubis: Hairy fatty elevation of skin in front of the pubic bones. 
2. Clitoris: Highly sensitive organ of 2-3 cm and is located anteriorly in 
the vulva. 
Fig. 42: Female reproductive organs,coronal section. 
Fig. 43: Female reproductive organs, sagittal section. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
59 
 
3. Labia majora: two large hairy folds of skin that provide protection for 
the urethral and vaginal orifices. 
4. Labia minora: Two small hairless folds of skin that lie between the 
labia majora. Labia minora encloses the vestibule of the vagina. 
5. Vestibule of the vagina: Is a triangular area bounded laterally by ,the 
labia majora and anteriorly by the clitoris. In the vestibule, the urethral 
orifice opens in front of the vaginal orifice and is present 2 cm. behind 
the clitoris. In the virgin, the vaginal orifice is protected by a mucous fold 
that has a central opening and is known as the hymen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NERVOUS SYSTEM (NS) 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 44: Normal position of the uterus. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
60 
 
NERVOUS SYSTEM (NS) 
 ● It consists of highly specialized cells that transmit information rapidly 
between various parts of body. 
● It is divided into two parts: central nervous system (CNS) and 
peripheral nervous system (PNS). 
● Brain and spinal cord constitute CNS which lies within the skull and 
vertebral canal. 
●Cranial and spinal nerves of PNS connect CNS with all other parts of 
the body. 
●CNS is collection of nerve cells connected in a complex fashion to do 
functions of nervous system; thought, language, emotion, control of 
movement and analysis of sensation. 
●Cellular Structure: Basic cellular unit of NS is the nerve cell or neuron 
●Neurons differ in size and shape according to their function and 
location, but all neurons have three characteristic components: a cell 
body, an axon, and dendrites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
body in various directions, and are receiving information and 
transmitting it to the cell body. 
 
●Cell body of a neuron is an expanded 
portion of the cell which contains the 
nucleus 
(fig.45) 
and 
apparatus 
necessary 
to 
sustain 
metabolic 
activities of the cell. 
●Axon is longitudinal, tubular process 
of cell membrane and cytoplasm; and 
transmit information away from cell 
body. 
●Dendrites are processes of the cell 
membrane that  radiate from  the  cell  
Fig. 45: Nerve cell. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
61 
 
●Dendrites differ from axons as they typically undergo extensive 
branching very close to the cell body. Axons, in contrast, remain 
singular for most of their course; do not branch until their ends are away 
from parent cell body. 
●Neuron has only one axon, several dendrites. 
●Lengths and caliber of axons and dendrites vary depending on 
function of neuron. 
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
CNS is formed of the brain and the spinal cord both are centrally 
located and protected by bones of the skull and vertebral column. 
I- BRAIN: The brain is enclosed inside the skull and 3 meninges, which 
protect it. The brain is formed of the following parts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Within the white matter masses of gray matter appears forming the 
basal ganglia (a group of nuclei involved in the control of movement). 
The most important basal ganglia are the caudate and lentiform nuclei.   
Fig 46: Central nervous system. 
a) Cerebrum: 
This is formed of two hemispheres 
connected by fibers called the corpus 
callosum. Each cerebral hemisphere 
is formed of an outer gray matter and 
an inner white matter. The gray 
matter is formed mainly of nerve cells 
with some nerve fibers. It is called the 
cerebral cortex. The cerebral cortex 
contains the motor and sensory 
areas as well as memory and psychic 
areas. The inner white matter is 
formed mainly of nerve fibers. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
62 
 
The surface of the cerebral cortex shows convolutions known as gyri 
separated by sulci. This increases the surface area of the cortex. The 
cerebral cortex contains about 14 billion nerve cells. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-The occipital lobe: It is located posteriorly. It contains the visual area. 
4-The temporal lobe: It is located inferiorly (fig. 47). It contains the 
auditory area (hearing). 
b) The cerebellum is mass of neural tissue, control posture, repetitive 
movements and geometric accuracy of voluntary movements. 
It is located inferior to the occipital lobe. It consists of two cerebellar 
hemispheres on each side connected together by a median part called 
the vermis. Like the cerebrum, the cerebellum has an outer cortex (gray 
matter) and inner medulla (white matter). The medulla contains masses 
of gray matter called the nuclei of the cerebellum (e.g. the dentate 
nucleus). The cerebellum is connected to the brain stem by three pairs 
of masses of nerve fibers called peduncles. These peduncles are: 
1-The superior cerebellar peduncles connect the cerebellum with the 
midbrain. 
Each cerebral hemisphere is 
divided into 4 lobes which 
are: 
1-The frontal lobe: It is located 
anteriorly. It contains the motor 
area of the brain. 
2-The parietal lobe: It is located 
posterior to the frontal lobe. It 
contains the sensory area of the 
brain. 
Fig 47: Lobes of the cerebral hemisphere 
(lateral surface). 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
63 
 
2-The middle cerebellar peduncles connect the cerebellum with the 
pons. 
3-The inferior cerebellar peduncles connect the cerebellum with 
medulla. 
c) The brain stem: 
It is a stalk-like structure which connects the brain with the spinal cord. 
It is formed of three different parts: 
1- The midbrain: It connects the cerebrum with the pons. It is 
connected with the cerebellum by the superior cerebellar peduncle. 
2- Pons: It connects the midbrain with the medulla oblongata It is 
connected with the cerebellum by the middle cerebellar peduncle. 
3- Medulla oblongata: It connects the pons with the spinal cord. It is 
connected with the cerebellum by inferior cerebellar peduncle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corpus 
callosum 
Brain stem 
Beginning of the spinal cord 
cerebellum 
Cerebral 
hemisphere 
Fig 48: Medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
●The spinal cord is formed of an outer layer of white matter and an 
inner layer of gray   matter. The   gray   matter is H shaped. The two 
anterior (horns) limbs contain motor cells and the two posterior horns 
contain sensory cells. 
●About 45 cm. long and occupies vertebral canal at cervical, thoracic 
and upper lumbar levels. 
●Width of spinal cord is not uniform along its length, expanded below its 
rostral end and near its caudal end. This occurs at levels of spinal cord 
responsible for innervation of upper and lower limbs; cervical and 
lumbar enlargement. 
II- SPINAL CORD 
●Long 
thick 
cable 
formed 
by 
thousands of longitudinally running 
axons surrounding a central core of 
gray matter.  
●The spinal cord is the continuation 
of the medulla oblonagata. It is 
enclosed within meninges inside 
the upper part of the vertebral 
canal. 
● It is divided into 31 segments: 8 
Cervical segments, 12 Thoracic 
segments, 5 Lumber segments, 5 
Sacral segments, and 1 Coccygeal 
segment. 
●A pair of spinal nerves arises from 
each segment of the spinal cord.  
 
Fig 49: Spinal cord 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
●Central core of spinal cord consists of gray matter, central area 
surrounding central canal of the spinal cord, central gray matter, 
projecting dorsolaterally and ventrally from this central area are 
extensions of gray matter, dorsal (post.) and ventral (ant.) horn. 
Ventral horns on each side are formed by cell bodies of neurons that 
innervate voluntary muscles, axons of these cells leave spinal cord 
through ventral roots. Dorsal horns consist of cells concerned with 
processing of sensory information, enters spinal cord through dorsal 
roots. 
●Between T1 and L2 segments of spinal cord, a horn of gray matter 
projects laterally in angle between dorsal and ventral horns on each 
side, lateral horn, contains cell bodies of neurons, axons of which 
constitute part of autonomic nervous system. 
 
Fig.50: General arrangement of somatic part of nervous system (left) 
compared to autonomic part of nervous system (right). 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
66 
 
●Peripheral part of spinal cord consists of white matter formed by axons 
arranged in tracts that convey information to or from brainstem, or 
between different segments of spinal cord. 
♦►The Meninges: 
Although glial (supporting) cells hold neurons of CNS together and 
afford them protection against metabolic insults, the CNS is a soft, 
cellular mass. So, it is vulnerable to external, mechanical insults which 
might arise where it freely mobile within the skull or vertebral canal. To 
protect against such insults, CNS is surrounded by 3 membranes, 
collectively called meninges, and is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid. 
♦►Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF): 
● It is a clear watery fluid filling subarachnoid space (fig.51).  
● It is secreted by capillaries that project into lateral, 3rd and 4th 
ventricles of the brain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 51: Circulation of CSF. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
67 
 
● It fills cavities of CNS and emerges through apertures in roof of 4th 
ventricle to fill subarachnoid space. 
● Secreted continuously and reabsorbed into bloodstream, reabsorption 
occurs through extensions of arachnoid mater, arachnoid granulations, 
that pierce dura mater of falx cerebri and project into superior sagittal 
sinus. 
NB: Cervical spinal cord segments remain related to their vertebrae, 
with cervical nerve roots more or less retaining their original transverse 
course (fig. 49). Upper thoracic spinal cord segments are displaced 
from their respective intervertebral foramina by about one segmental 
level and progressively lower spinal cord segments are displaced until 
S5 spinal segment lies 10 vertebral segments shorter than S5 
intervertebral foramen. 
• Below caudal tip of spinal cord, L2 to Co1 nerve roots form a leash of 
nerves hanging freely in dural sac, cauda equine (fig.49). 
 
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (PNS) 
●This is formed of the peripheral nerves (cranial and spinal). Spinal 
nerves tend to form plexuses which are the cervical, the brachial, the 
lumbar and the sacral plexuses. Cranial nerves are 12 pairs of nerves. 
● Peripheral tissues of body can be classified into structural 
components that give body its shape or external form, and internal 
organs, or viscera. 
●Structural tissues, such as bone, muscle and skull are referred to 
collectively as somatic structures, and the nerves that supply these 
tissues are called somatic nerves. 
● Nerves that supply the viscera, such as heart, lungs and digestive 
tract, can be called visceral nerves. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
68 
 
● Because nervous functions concerning viscera are largely automatic 
and subconscious, that part of NS that innervates viscera is called 
autonomic nervous system, has components in both CNS and PNS. 
►►Constituents of Peripheral Nerves: 
Peripheral Nerves are composed of different types of axons that are 
classified 
according 
to 
their 
size, 
function, 
or 
physiological 
characteristics. Classification of axons recognizes afferent (sensory) 
fibers and efferent (motor) fibers. 
1. CRANIAL NERVES: 
● Certain nerves project from cranial portion of CNS. 
● They connect brainstem and diencephalon with various structures 
and tissues in head and heck, and with various thoracic and abdominal 
viscera. 
●While inside the skull, these nerves constitute part of CNS and 
become peripheral nerves only once they leave the skull. 
● They are 12 pairs of cranial nerves, known by number or by a name: 
the name usually reflects form, function or distribution of the nerve. 
The cranial nerves are: 
1-The first (I), the olfactory nerve. It is purely sensory and mediates 
perception of smell from the nose. 
2-The second (II), the optic nerve. It is purely sensory and transmits 
visual information from ipsilateral retina. 
3-The third (II), the oculomotor nerve. It is motor to some muscles of 
the eye. It has parasympathetic fibers which constricts the pupil. 
4-The fourth (IV), the trochlear nerve. It is purely motor. It supplies a 
single muscle (superior oblique muscle) of the eye. 
5-The fifth (V), the trigeminal nerve. It is divided into three branches; 
Ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular. It is sensory to the skin of the 
face and motor to muscles of mastication. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
69 
 
6-The sixth (VI), the abducent nerve. It is purely motor and innervates 
lateral rectus muscle of the eye which is responsible for abducting the 
eye. 
7-The seventh (VII), the facial nerve. It is a mixed nerve. It is motor to 
muscles of the face (muscles of facial expression) and carries taste 
sensation from the anterior two thirds of the tongue. It has 
parasympathetic secretory fibers to the lacrimal, submandibular and 
sublingual salivary glands. 
8-The eight (VIII), the vestibulocochlear nerve. It is purely sensory. 
has 2 components: vestibular & cochlear. Cochlear part arises in 
cochlea of inner ear, responsible for hearing. Vestibular part innervates 
vestibular apparatus of inner ear, responsible for sense of balance. 
9-The ninth (IX), the glossopharyngeal nerve. It carries the taste 
sensation from the posterior 1/3 of the tongue. It provides sensory 
supply to the pharynx It is also motor to one muscle (stylopharyngeus) 
in the pharynx. It has parasympathetic fibers to the parotid gland.  
10-The tenth (X), the vagus nerve, has a diverse distribution including 
sensation of mucosa of larynx, motor to smooth muscles of much of 
viscera of chest and abdominal viscera. It carries parasympathetic 
inhibitory fibers to the heart. IX and X cranial nerves also innervate 
carotid body and carotid sinus, so, involved in cardiovascular reflexes.   
11-The eleventh (XI), the accessory nerve, has two components: a 
cranial and a spinal part. The two join for a short distance, but fibres of 
the cranial  part are transferred to vagus nerve through which it is 
distributed to muscles of pharynx, larynx and soft palate. Spinal 
accessory nerve supplies sternomastoid and trapezius muscles. 
12-The twelfth (XII), the hypoglossal nerve, is motor to the muscles 
of the tongue. 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
70 
 
2. SPINAL NERVES: 
●They are short nerves that lie within intervertebral foramina of 
vertebral column. 
●Outside vertebral column they form elements of PNS, but within 
vertebral canal each spinal nerve is connected to spinal cord by central 
and dorsal nerve roots which are components of CNS. 
●There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves, each being named according to 
one segment of the spinal cord from which it arises. Each nerve is 
formed of an anterior root (motor arising from anterior horn cells) and 
posterior root (sensory reaching the posterior horn cells). The two roots 
unite to form the trunk of the nerve which is mixed. The nerve trunk is 
divided into an anterior ramus and a posterior ramus. Each ramus is 
mixed. Each spinal nerve carries different sensations from the skin, 
muscles and deeper structures as well as motor fibers to skeletal 
muscles. Sensory fibers relay in spinal ganglia before entering the cord. 
The spinal nerves tend to form plexuses in regions supplying the 
limbs.these plexuses are cervical, brachial, lumbar and sacral plexuses.  
Autonomic Nervous System (fig.52) 
●The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system 
concerned with the innervation of involuntary structures such as the 
heart, smooth muscles and glands throughout the body. 
●It is divided into 2 parts: sympathetic and parasympathetic. 
●The two systems differ in where they are connected to CNS: 
►Parasympathetic nerves emerge from the CNS in cranial nerves Ill, 
VII, IX and X, and in S2-S4 spinal nerves. So, parasympathetic nerves 
are having cranio- sacral outflow. Activities of the parasympathetic 
system aim at conserving and restoring energy of the body. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
71 
 
►Axons of sympathetic nervous system emerge from spinal cord in T 1 
L2 spinal nerves. So, sympathetic nerves are having thoraco-lumbar 
outflow. It prepares the body for emergency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 52: Autonomic 
nervous system
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
72 
 
Endocrine Glands 
Endocrine glands or ductless glands are glands of the endocrine 
system that secrete their products, hormones, directly into the blood 
rather than through a duct. The main endocrine glands include the 
pituitary gland, pancreas, ovaries, testes, thyroid gland, and adrenal 
glands(fig.53). 
►♦The pineal gland is located in the diencephalon. Its primary 
hormone is melatonin, which influences daily rhythms and may have an 
antigonadotropic effect in humans. 
►♦Hypophysis cerebri (Pituitary gland) is a small gland about the 
size of a pea hanging by a stalk, the infundibulum, which forms the floor 
of the third ventricle of the brain. It rests on the deeply concave body of 
the sphenoid bone in the region behind the nasal cavities. It is made up 
of two lobes, an anterior and a posterior, entirely different from one 
another functionally. 
●The anterior lobe forms most of the gland. It produces several trophic 
hormones which because of their influence on other endocrine glands 
have caused the hypophysis cerebri to be referred to as "master 
gland". 
●The posterior lobe is a down growth from the brain and produces 
secretions which stimulate contraction of the uterus (oxytocin) and the 
retention of water in the body (antidiuretic hormone). 
►♦Thyroid gland lies in front of the neck. The thyroid gland consists of 
2 lobes and an isthmus. The thyroid gland secretes thyroid hormone 
(thyroxin) which is concerned with stimulation of metabolism of the 
body. When produced in excessive quantities, it disturbs the normal 
rate at which the cells of the body function; and this is called 
thyrotoxicosis. 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
73 
 
►♦Parathyroid glands 
The parathyroid glands are 4 small ovoid bodies, two on each side. 
They lie on the back of the thyroid gland. They regulate the relative 
amounts of calcium in the blood and in the bones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►♦Thymus gland 
This gland, an essentially elongated bilobed gland, lies behind the 
manubrium sterni, and in front of the great vessels above the heart. The 
thymus is largest and most active during the neonatal and pre-
adolescent periods. By the early teens, the thymus begins to atrophy 
and thymic stroma is replaced by adipose (fat) tissue. It resembles a 
lymphoid organ and no hormone has yet been isolated from it. 
►♦Suprarenal (Adrenal glands) are two glands. Each one caps the 
top of each kidney, but they are not functionally related. It is formed of 
cortex and medulla. It produces a group of hormones. Some are 
Fig.53: Endocrine glands. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
74 
 
essential to life because they regulate water and electrolyte balance. 
The cortex secretes mineralocorticoids (aldosterone), glucocorticoids 
(cortisone) and small amounts of sex hormones. The medulla secretes 
adrenaline and nor-adrenaline. 
►♦Pancreas has both an exocrine and an endocrine function. The 
endocrine cells are small islets of cells that release the hormone insulin 
and glucagon into the blood stream. These islets are called islets of 
Langerhans. Glandular tissue pours its exocrine secretion through the 
pancreatic duct into the duodenum.  
►♦Testes and Ovaries not only produce the spermatozoa and ova 
respectively, which may be considered as exocrine function but they 
have an important endocrine function as well. Specialized cells release 
the male and female sex hormones. These regulate the sexual function 
of the adult person and determine the secondary sexual characters 
including all aspects of maleness and femaleness. The testes secret 
androgens (testosterone) and the ovaries secrete estrogen and 
progesterone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
75 
 
BONES OF UPPER LIMB 
The upper limb is composed of the shoulder girdle, arm, forearm and 
hand. The bones of these segments are as follows(Fig.14): 
1. Bones of the shoulder girdle: are the scapula and clavicle together. 
These 2 bones surround the upper part of the chest like a belt. 
2. The bone of the arm: is the humerus. 
3. Bones of the forearm are  radius (laterally), and ulna (medially). 
4. Bones of the hand: are the carpus, metacarpus and phalanges. 
THE CLAVICLE 
▼▼ Functions: 
1. It acts as a strut to carry the weight of the limb. It allows the limb to 
swing away from the trunk. 
2. It transmits the weight of the upper limb to the trunk through its 
articulation with the sternum. 
▼▼ Parts of the clavicle: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig: 54:The Clavicle 
It is a long bone. It has a 
shaft that lies horizontaly, 
and two ends medial and 
lateral. The medial end is 
thick 
and 
rounded 
and 
articulates with the clavicular 
notch 
of 
the 
manubrium 
sterni 
to 
form 
the 
stemoclavicular joint. 
The lateral end is fattened 
and 
articulates 
with 
the 
acromion of the scapula to 
form the acromioclavicular 
joint. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
76 
 
The shaft: 
●It presents a double curvature resembling the letter S. 
●Its medial 2/3 is convex forwards while its lateral 1/3 is convex 
bachwards. 
●Its lateral 1/3 is flattened having 2 borders (anterior and posterior) and 
2 surfaces (superior and inferior). 
●Its medial 2/3 is cylindrical having 4 surfaces (superior, inferior, 
anterior and posterior). 
●● SURFACE LANDMARKS: The clavicle can readily be felt beneath 
the skin throughout its length (the two ends and the shaft).  
●●TO IDENTIFY THE CLAVICLE RIGHT OF LEFT: Put the bone in the 
anatomical position with reference to your body. 
1. The medial end is rounded and thick, while the lateral end is flat. 
2. The anterior surface is convex in its medial 2/3, but concave in its 
lateral 1/3. 
3. The superior surface is smooth, while the inferior surface is rough 
THE SCAPULA 
It is a flat triangular in shape (fig.55) having three borders (superior, 
medial and lateral), two surfaces (anterior and posterior) and three 
processes (spine, acromion and coracoid process).  
♦BORDERS: 
1) Superior border: It extends from the superior angle to the lateral 
angle which is represented by the glenoid cavity. It has the 
suprascapular notch which is transformed into a foramen by the 
suprascapular ligament. 
2) Medial (vertebral) border: It extends from the superior angle to the 
inferior angle opposite the ribs from the 2nd to the 7th. 
3) Lateral (axillary) border: It is directed towards the axilla and 
extends from the glenoid cavity to the inferior angle. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
77 
 
♦ SURFACES: 
1) Anterior (Costal) surface: It is concave and is called subscapular 
fossa. 
2) Posterior (Dorsal) surface * It is marked by the spine of scapula 
which divides the surface into a supraspinous fossa (above) and an 
infraspinous fossa (below).  
♦ARTICULATIONS: It articulates with the clavicle by its acromion to form 
the acromioclavicular joint and with the head of humerus by the glenoid 
fossa to form shoulder joint. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE HUMERUS 
♦It is a long bone (fig.56). It is made up of a shaft, upper and lower ends. 
►►The upper end is formed of the head, greater and lesser 
tuberosities. 
♦The head forms a hemisphere directed medially. The anatomical neck 
is the line which immediately adjoins the articular surface of the head.  
♦The lesser tuberosity is a projection from the anterior surface of the 
upper end. 
Fig. 55: The scapula. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
78 
 
♦The greater tuberosity is projection at the lateral aspect of the upper 
end. 
♦The two tuberosities are separated by the intertubercular sulcus. 
♦The surgical neck is the part of the bone that joins the upper end with 
the shaft. 
►►Shaft of humerus: It is cylindrical in its upper ½ and triangular in its 
lower ½. It has 3 borders (medial, lateral and posterior) and 3 surfaces 
(anteromedial, anterolateral, and posterior). 
►►The lower end is formed of articular and non articular parts. 
I-Articular:  
a) Capitulum: A smooth rounded convex projection. It is seen on the 
anterior and inferior surfaces. It articulates with the head of radius. 
b) Trochlea: It a pulley shaped articular surface medial to the capitulum. 
It articulates with the trochlear notch of the ulna.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.56: The 
humerus 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
79 
 
II-Non articular: 
a) Medial epicondyle: A projection on the medial side of the lower end. 
It is felt subcutaneously.  
b) Lateral epicondyle: A projection on the lateral side of the lower end. 
►►Articulations: 
1. With the glenoid cavity of the scapula by its head at the glenohumeral 
articulation (shoulder joint). 
2. With the radius by its capitulum and with the ulna by its trochlea at the 
elbow joint.  
THE RADIUS 
♦It is the lateral bone of the forearm. 
♦It is a long bone made up of a shaft, an upper end and a lower end. 
►►The upper end is made up of head, neck and tuberosity (fig.58). 
♦The head is disc shaped. It is subcutaneous. Its upper surface is 
concave articulating with the capitulum. It articulates medially with the 
radial notch of the ulna to form the superior radio-ulnar joint. 
♦Neck is constricted and cylindrical below the head. 
♦Radial tuberosity is below and medial to the neck. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.57: Radius and 
ulna. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►►The Lower end: 
It is formed of 5 surfaces. Lateral surface forming the styloid process, 
medial surface which has an unlar notch, lower surface, anterior surface 
and posterior surface. 
THE ULNA 
It is the medial bone of the forearm. It is a long bone, with a shaft, an 
upper and a lower end. 
►►The upper end is made up of the olecranon and coronoid 
porcesses and trochlear and radial notches (fig.58). 
Olecranon is directed forwards, forms a beak and has anterior, 
posterior, lateral and medial surfaces. 
The coronoid process is a projection that is directed forwards below the 
olecranon. It has upper, anterior, medial and lateral surfaces. 
►►The shaft has 3 borders and 3 surfaces. The borders are anterior 
border (rounded), posterior border (sharp) and interosseous border 
(sharp and directed laterally).The surfaces are anterior, medial and 
posterior. 
►►The shaft: 
It has 3 borders and 3 surfaces: The 
borders 
are 
anterior 
(rounded), 
Posterior (sharp) and Interosseous 
(shape and directed medially).The 
surfaces are anterior surface; between 
the anterior and the interosseous 
border, lateral surface between the 
posterior and anterior barders and a 
posterior 
surface 
between 
the 
posterior and interosseous borders. 
Fig.58: 
Lower 
end 
of 
humerus and upper ends of 
radius and ulna. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
81 
 
►► The lower end is smaller than the upper end, and consists of the 
head (laterally) and the styloid process (medially).The head articulates 
with the ulnar notch of the radius to form the inferior radio-ulnar joint. 
SKELETON OF THE HAND 
The skeleton of the wrist and hand is composed of: 
 1. Carpal bones.               2. Metacarpal bones.              3. Phalanges. 
The carpal bones are eight short bones arranged in 2 rows: proximal 
and distal. The metacarpal bones are five in number. The phalanges 
are fourteen in number three for each finger and two for the thumb 
BONES OF LOWER LIMB 
HIP BONE 
It is a large, irregular bone (fig.59). It is formed of three parts, ileum, 
ischium and pubis fused together in the acetabulum which is a cup-
shaped hollow on the lateral surface of the bone. Below and anterior to 
it is the obturator foramen. 
♦The ileum: It has 3 borders, upper, anterior and posterior and 2 
surfaces, lateral and medial. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 59:  (A) Parts of the hip bone,(B) The Y-shaped triradiate 
cartilage extending through the acetabulum, uniting the three 
primary parts of the bone.  
 
A)
) 
B)
) 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
82 
 
♦The pubis: It is formed of a body and two rami, superior and inferior.  
♦The ischium: It is formed of a body, ischial tuberosity and ramus. 
Projecting from the medial border of the body is the ischial spine which 
separates the greater from the lesser sciatic notches. 
♦Articulation: 
1. By the acetabulum with the head of femur (hip joint) 
2. By the pubis with the pubis of opposite side (symphysis pubis), a 
secondary cartilagenous joint. 
3. By the posterior part of ileum with the sacrum (sacroiliac joint). 
THE FEMUR 
It is the largest and strongest bone in the body. It consists of a shaft, 
upper and lower ends. 
►►The upper end: 
It is formed of a head, neck, greater trochanter and lesser trochanter. 
Head is rounded, smooth, directed upwards and medially to articulate 
with the acetabulum forming the hip joint. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 60:  The femur. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
83 
 
Neck is about 5cm long. It connects the head with the shaft. It forms an 
angle with the shaft of 125. 
Greater trochanter is quadrangular in shape projecting laterally at the 
junction of the neck with the shaft. 
Lesser trochanter is conical projection directed medially and 
backwards. 
►►The shaft is thinnest at its middle, it expands a little as it is traced 
upwards, but it widens near the lower end of femur. 
►►The lower end is made up of 2 condyles (medial and lateral). They 
are fused anteriorly. Posteriorly, a deep intercondylar fossa separates 
the 2 condyles. 
►►Articulations: 
1. The head articulates with the acetabulum in the hip joint. 
2. The two condyles articulate with the tibia in the knee joint. 
3. The patella articulates with the anterior surface of the lower end of 
femur. 
THE TIBIA 
It is the medial bone of the leg. It is made up of a shaft, an upper and 
lower ends. 
►►The upper end is expanded. It comprises two prominent medial 
and lateral condyles and the tuberosity of the tibia. The tibial tuberosity 
lies on the front of the upper end at its junction with the shaft. 
►►The shaft has 3 surfaces and3 borders. The surfaces are anterior, 
medial and posterior. The borders are anterior, posterior and 
interosseous border (sharp and directed laterally). 
►►The lower end is slightly expanded. Its medial side projects 
downwards forming the medial malleolus. It articulates with two bones: 
The talus: below, to form the ankle joint (synovial) and the lower end of 
fibula: laterally, to form the inferior tibio-fibular joint (fibrous type).  
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►►Articulations: 
1. By the superior surface of medial and lateral condyles with the 
condyles of femur (knee joint). 
2. By the inferior surface of lower end with the talus (ankle joint). 
3.By the lateral side of' lateral condyle with the head of fibula to form  
superior tibiofibular joint. 
4. By lateral side of lower end with the lowermost part of the shaft of 
fibula to form inferior tibiofibular joint. 
THE FIBULA 
It is the lateral bone of the leg. It is made up of upper end (head, neck 
&styloid process), a shaft, and lower end (lateral malleolus). 
►►Articulations: 
1.By its head, the fibula articulates with the tibia. 
2.By its lowermost medial part of the shaft, it articulates with the tibia. 
3.By the articular part of lateral malleolus, it articulates with talus at the 
ankle joint. 
 
Fig. 61:  The tibia &fibula 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
85 
 
SKELETON OF THE FOOT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
five  in number. They are situated between the tarsus proximally and 
the phalanges distally. The phalanges of the foot are arranged as 
follows, two in the big toe and three in each of the other toes. 
THE SKULL 
It is the skeleton of the head. It is formed of the mandible and other 
some immovable flat bones articulate with each other by fibrous joint.  
The skull is described from many aspects: 
►►The norma frontalis: The frontal aspect of the skull. 
The bones forming this norma are: 
Below the mouth: by the mandible.  
Above the mouth: there is the maxilla on either side and most laterally 
the zygomatic bone. The two maxillae enclose between them the two 
nasal bones. Superiorly is the frontal bone. 
The most prominent features in this aspect are the orbits and the 
anterior aperture of the nasal cavity. 
 
The bones of the foot are 
made of. 
1. The tarsus bones form the 
posterior part of the foot. 
2. The metatarsus bones form 
the anterior part of the foot. 
3. The phalanges bones of 
toes. 
The tarsal bones are seven 
short bones arranged in two 
rows with a bone intervening. 
The metatarsal   bones   are    
Fig. 62:  Bones of the foot. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
►►The norma lateralis: The lateral aspect of the skull 
This aspect is made up of the following bones: 
Superiorly: Nasal, frontal and parietal bones. 
Inferiorly: Maxilla, zygomatic, greater wing of sphenoid, temporal and 
occipital bones. 
It shows the following features: 
1) External ear.  
2) Pterion which is H-shaped meeting of bones and is important from 
the surgical point of view.  
3) Zygomatic arch.            4) Mastoid process.           5) Styloid process. 
►►Norma Verticalis:  The superior aspect of the skull. 
Fig. 63:  Norma 
 frontalis. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
87 
 
The bones forming this aspect are the frontal, parietal and occipital 
bones.  
The sagittal suture: Lies in the median plane and connects the two 
parietal bones.  
The coronal suture: Passes transversely between the frontal bone and 
the two parietal bones. 
►►Norma occipitalis: Base of the skull 
This aspect is formed of two parietal bones above and the occipital 
bone below.  
►►Norma basalis: 
This aspect is divided into three parts:  
Anterior part: It is made up of the bony palate and the alveoar arches.  
The middle part: It is formed by the sphenoid bone, occipital and 
temporal bones.  
The posterior part: It is made up of the occipital bone. 
The cranial cavity 
It is the interior of the skull. It is occupied by the brain. It is classified 
into anterior, middle and posterior cranial fossae. 
THE MANDIBLE 
It is freely movable bone. It is formed of a body and two rami. The upper 
surface of the mandible lodges the teeth. It articulates with the skull at 
the temporomandibular joints.  
THE HYOID BONE 
It is in the middle of the upper part of the front of the neck above the 
thyroid cartilage. It is formed of a body, 2 lesser horns and 2 greater 
horns. 
 
 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 64:  Norma Lateralis. 
 
Fig. 65:  The mandible. 
Fig. 66:  The hyoid bone. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
89 
 
VERTEBRAL COLUMN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
♦♦ At birth the vertebral column is concave forwards but at the third 
month, the cervical convexity appears and at the 10- month till the 2nd 
year the lumbar convexity appears. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The human vertebral column is 
made up of series of vertebrae :7 
cervical. 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar. 5 
sacral fused into the sacrum and 
4 coccygeal fused into the coccyx. 
♦♦Intervertebral 
disc 
lies 
in 
between the bodies of vertebrae. 
►►Functions of the column: 
1) Protects the spinal cord.  
2) Supports the skull.  
3) Transmits the weight of the 
body to the lower limbs.  
4) Forms the axis of the body. 
Fig. 67:  The vertebral column. 
Fig. 68:  Curves of the 
vertebral column. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
90 
 
►►Structure of the Typical Vertebra (fig.70) 
♦Body: Ventrally  
♦Vertebral arch: is made up of a pedicle and a lamina on each side. 
Between the posterior surface of the body and the neural arch is 
enclosed the vertebral foramen which contains the spinal cord and 
meninges.  
♦Seven processes diverge from the arch: 
1) Spinous process, one in midline posteriorly.  
2) Transverse processes, two projecting laterally on either sides.  
3) Articular processes, two superior and two inferior. 
►►Articulations between two adjacent vertebrae(fig. 72): 
1. Bodies: articulate with each other by the intervertebral disc 
(secondary cartilaginous joint). 
2. Articular processes articulate by synovial joints. 
3. Laminae articulate by the ligamentum flavum. 
4. Spines connected by interspinous and supraspinous ligaments. 
5. Transverse processes by intertransverse ligament.  
▼▼▼Cervical vertebrae: 
From the 3rd to the 6th are typical. The first, second and seventh 
vertebra are atypical. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 69: Typical cervical vertebra. 
1. Body. 
2. pedicle  
3. foramen for vertebral artery  
4. superior articular process  
5. lamina  
6. spinous process (bifid)  
7. vertebral canal 
8.  transverse process 
 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 72:  Articulation between two 
adjacent vertebrae. 
 
Fig. 73:  Lumbar 
vertebra. 
Fig. 74:  Sacrum 
Fig. 71:  Thoracic 
vertebra. 
Fig. 70: Structure of the 
Typical Vertebra. 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
92 
 
Characters of typical cervical vertebra: The spine is short and bifid. 
The transverse processes have the foramen transversarium in which 
pass the vertebral vessels (fig.69) 
The atypical cervical vertebrae: 
♣♣The first cervical vertebra (atlas). No spine and no body. 
♣♣The second cervical vertebra (axis): has the adenoid process 
upwards. 
♣♣The seventh cervical vertebra has non-bifid spine. 
▼▼▼Thoracic Vertebrae: They are characterized by(fig.71): 
1. No foramen transversarium. 
2. Spine is long and directed downwards. 
3. An upper and lower costal facet is present on either side of the body. 
4. The transverse process near its end shows an articular facet. 
The first, 11th and 12th vertebrae are modified from the general 
characteristic pattern so they are atypical. 
▼▼▼Lumbar Vertebrae: They are 5 in number (fig. 73). 
They are characterized by large size, and no costal facets. The 
transverse process is long, tapering with no foramen. There is a 
mamillary process at the base of the transverse process. The spine is 
quadrangular and horizontal.  
THE SACRUM 
They are 5 vertebrae fused together forming one single bone. It is 
triangle in shape having apex at the lower end while the base is at its 
upper end. It also has anterior pelvic concave surface and dorsal 
convex surface, lateral surface and a sacral canal (fig.74).  
The sacrum forms the posterior part of the bony pelvis, wedged in 
between the right and left hip bones. 
►►Articulation: 
The base articulates with the 5th lumbar vertebra.  
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
93 
 
The apex articulates with the coccyx. 
The lateral surface articulates with the ileum. 
STERNUM 
It is an elongated flat bone located ventrally in the midline of thorax. It is 
formed of manubrium, body and xiphoid process from above 
downwards. 
 ►►Articulations: 
♦The manubrium sterni articulates above and laterally with the sternal 
end of the clavicle. 
♦The lateral border of the sternum -articulates with the costal cartilages 
of the upper seven ribs.  
The Ribs 
They are 12 ribs on each side. It forms a series of obliquely placed 
arches that make up a large part of the thoracic cage. 
►►Types of ribs: 
1-True: The upper seven ribs. They articulate anteriorly by their costal 
cartilages with the sternum. 
2-False: The 8th, 9th and 10th, each of their costal cartilage joins the one 
above it. 
3-Floating: 11th and 12th with free anterior end. 
♣♣Features of a typical rib: 
The rib is composed of: 
 1) An anterior or sternal end attached to costal cartilage. 
2) A posterior or vertebral end and is formed of a head, neck and a 
tubercle. 
3) A shaft inbetween which is twisted antero-posteriorly. 
The rib has an outer convex and an inner concave surfaces. Its upper 
border is rounded; its lower border is sharp. The costal groove is near 
its lower border.   
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا
94 
 
►►Articulations: 
♣ Posteriorly: All ribs articulate by their heads with the bodies of 
thoracic vertebrae. The upper ten ribs articulate by their tubercles with 
the transverse processes. 
♣ Anteriorly: The cartilages of the true ribs articulate with the sternum, 
those of the false ribs articulate together. The floating ribs are free. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 78:  Articulation 
between 2 thoracic 
vertebra and rib. 
Fig. 77:  Typical ribs 
Fig. 75:  Sternum 
Fig. 76 
Icecream PDF Editor . مادختساب هذه ةلومحملا تادنتسملل ةقيثو ريرحت مت
.ةيئاملا ةمالعلا ةلازال فرتحم ىلا ةيقرتلا